Professor: Now, let’s look
at how to use volume
and filter effects
inside of EarSketch,
along with setEffect()
and effect envelopes.
I have a Python script here.
Beginning by importing
the EarSketch library,
I call the init() function.
I call the setTempo() function
to set the tempo to 120 beats
per minute.
And then I have a fitMedia()
function call here
placing this sound on track 1
beginning at measure 1,
ending at the start
of measure 9.
That gives me some sound
on track 1 that I have
as a bass sound that I can then
add effects to.
So let’s hear the original sound
without any effects.
[electronic musical scales
ascending and descending]
Now,
to make things easier,
I am going to define some
variables that represent
different measures in the music
where I want to start or end
different effects envelopes,
so that it’s easier to refer
to them multiple times
or to change them later.
So I have pointA,
B, C,
D, E,
and F all defined here.
PointA is the beginning
of measure 1.
PointB the beginning
of measure 4.
PointC is halfway
between the start of measure 6
and the start of measure 7.
PointD,
the start of measure 7.
PointE, halfway
between the start of measure 8
and the start of measure 9.
And pointF is the beginning
of measure 9.
And then I’m going to add
a setEffect() call here
on track 1, since it’s the only
track I have sound on.
The effect will be FILTER
and the parameter of that effect
I’m changing
is the filter frequency—so
how bright or dark the sound is
that I’m allowing to stay
in the mix.
And then this is going from
PointA—that’s measure 1—
to pointB,
the start of measure 4.
So between the start of measure
1 and the start of measure 4,
I’m changing that filter
frequency from 20 hertz,
which is the lowest it could
possibly be,
all the way up to 10,000 hertz,
which is about halfway
where it can get you.
The maximum is 20,000 hertz.
So if I hit run now,
we can see the envelope
here—starting at 20 hertz
at the start of measure 1,
going up until it gets to 10,000
hertz at the start of measure 4.
And we can hear that filter
sweep now,
as we listen to the music.
[electronic musical scales
ascending and descending]
So now, let’s add some envelopes
for our volume.
The first one here is a fade-in
that we can put at the beginning
of the music, going
from -10 decibels
to zero—so that’s the original
volume—from pointB to pointC,
so measure 4 to measure 6.5.
So if I run this,
we can see that at measure 4
we’re at -10 decibels.
By the time we get
to measure 6.5,
we’re up to 0 decibels.
And then if I look at the next
line here,
I’m going to start to do
a fade-out,
starting at pointD,
measure 7,
through to pointE,
measure 8.5,
going from 0dB—the original
volume—back down to -10dB.
So we can see the next part
of that fade coming down here.
And then finally, I want to have
a last bit that’s a bit
of a faster fade-out,
at the very end from measure 8.5
to 9— that last half a measure
from pointE, from -10dB
all the way down to -60dB,
which is silence,
so that it has that quick
fade-out at the end.
And you can see that last part
of the envelope comes on now—
we have that quick fade-out
at the very end.
So now we can hear
the whole piece of music
with the filter sweep and with
the fade-ins and the fade-outs.
[electronic musical scales
ascending and descending]